ready for review (#69)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2020-01-24-numpy-broadcasting/numpy-broadcasting.Rmd

description: > 
 Broadcasting, as done by Python's scientific computing library NumPy, involves dynamically extending shapes so that arrays of different sizes may be passed to operations that expect conformity - such as adding or multiplying elementwise. In NumPy, how broadcasting works is specified exactly; the same rules apply to TensorFlow operations. For anyone who finds herself, occasionally, consulting Python code, this post strives to explain.
 
author:
  - name: Sigrid Keydana
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydana2020broadcast
date: 01-24-2020
categories:
  - Introductions
  - Concepts
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/thumb.jpg
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

We develop, train and deploy TensorFlow models from R. But that doesn't mean we don't make use of documentation, blog posts, and examples written in Python. We look up specific functionality in the [official TensorFlow API docs](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf); we get inspiration from other people's code.

> Depending on how comfortable you are with Python, there are obstacles. One of them tends to be the assumption you know how _broadcasting_ works. And perhaps, you'd say you're vaguely familiar with it: So when arrays have different shapes, some elements get duplicated till their shapes match and ... and anyway, isn't R vectorized as well?

Author: I guess it's the usual, slightly (or more than slightly ;-))) rhetoric style. Like: "There's a problem."
I'll try to think of something...

> While such a global notion may work in general, like when skimming a blog post, it's not enough to understand, say, examples in the TensorFlow API docs. In this post, we'll try to arrive at a more exact understanding, and check it on concrete examples.

Author: "Depending on how comfortable you are with Python, there's a problem. For example: You're supposed to know how _broadcasting_ works."

```{python}
x[1] 
# array([3, 4])

x[1, ] 
# array([3, 4])
```

While the second one sure looks a bit like R, the mechanism is different. Technically, these `start:stop` things are parts of a Python _tuple_ -- that list-like, but immutable data structure that can be written with or without parentheses, e.g., `1,2` or `(1,2`) --, and whenever we have more dimensions in the array than elements in the tuple NumPy will assume we meant `:` for that dimension: Just select everything.

We can see that moving on to three dimensions. Here is a 2 x 3 x 1-dimensional array:

```{python}
x = np.array([[[1],[2],[3]], [[4],[5],[6]]])
x
# array([[[1],
#         [2],
#         [3]],
# 
#        [[4],
#         [5],
#         [6]]])

x.shape
# (2, 3, 1)

```

In R, this would throw an error, while in Python it works:

```{python}
x[0,]
#array([[1],
#       [2],
#       [3]])
```

In such a case, for enhanced readability we could instead use the so-called `Ellipsis`, explicitly asking Python to "use up all dimensions required to make this work":

```{python}
x[0, ...]
#array([[1],
#       [2],
#       [3]])
```

> We stop here with our selection of essential (yet confusing, possibly, to infrequent Python users) Numpy indexing features; re. "possibly confusing" though, here are a few remarks about array creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We stop here with our selection of essential (yet possibly confusing to infrequent Python users) Numpy indexing features; re. "possibly confusing" though, here are a few remarks about array creation.
```

### Syntax for array creation

Creating a more-dimensional NumPy array is not that hard -- depending on how you do it. The trick is to use `reshape` to tell NumPy exactly what shape you want. For example, to create an array of all zeros, of dimensions 3 x 4 x 2:

```{python}
np.zeros(24).reshape(4, 3, 2)
```

But we also want to understand what others might write. And then, you might see things like these:

```{python}
c1 = np.array([[[0, 0, 0]]])
c2 = np.array([[[0], [0], [0]]]) 
c3 = np.array([[[0]], [[0]], [[0]]])
```

These are all 3-dimensional, and all have three elements, so their shapes must be 1 x 1 x 3, 1 x 3 x 1, and 3 x 1 x 1, in some order. Of course, `shape` is there to tell us:

```{python}
c1.shape # (1, 1, 3)
c2.shape # (1, 3, 1)
c3.shape # (3, 1, 1) 
```

> but we'd like to be able to "parse" internally without executing the code. One way to think about it would be processing the brackets like a state machine, every opening bracket moving one axis to the right and every closing bracket moving back left by one axis. Let us know if you can think of other -- possibly more helpful -- mnemonics!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but we'd like to be able to "parse" mentally without executing the code. One way to think about it would be processing the brackets like a state machine, every opening bracket moving one axis to the right and every closing bracket moving back left by one axis. Let us know if you can think of other -- possibly more helpful -- mnemonics!
```

> In the very last sentence, we on purpose used "left" and "right" referring to the array axes; "out there" though, you'll also hear "outmost" and "innermost". Which, then, is which?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the very last sentence, we used "left" and "right" referring to the array axes. Elsewhere, though, you'll also hear "outmost" and "innermost". But which is which?
```

Reviewer: I tried to streamline this a little bit in terms of sentence structure (since you're referencing presumably unfamiliar terminology).

   # array 2, shape:        7  1  5
```

2. Starting to look from the right, the sizes along aligned axes either have to _match exactly_, or one of them has to be `1`: In which case the latter is broadcast to the one not equal to `1`.

3. If on the left, one of the arrays has an additional axis (or more than one), the other is virtually expanded to have a `1` in that place, in which case broadcasting will happen as stated in (2).

Stated like this, it probably sounds incredibly simple. Maybe it is, and it only seems complicated because it presupposes correct parsing of array shapes (which as shown above, can be confusing)?

Here again is a quick example to test our understanding:

```{python}
a = np.zeros([2, 3]) # shape (2, 3)
b = np.zeros([2])    # shape (2,)
c = np.zeros([3])    # shape (3,)

a + b # error

a + c
# array([[0., 0., 0.],
#        [0., 0., 0.]])
```

All in accord with the rules. Maybe there's something else that makes it confusing? 
From linear algebra, we are used to thinking in terms of column vectors (often seen as the default) and row vectors (accordingly, seen as their transposes). What now is 

```{python}
np.array([0, 0])
```

> , of shape -- as we've seen a few times by now -- `(2,)`? Really it's neither, it's just some one-dimensional array structure. We can create row vectors and column vectors though, in the sense of 1 x n and n x 1 matrices, by explicitly adding a second axis. Any of these would create a column vector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of shape -- as we've seen a few times by now -- `(2,)`? Really it's neither, it's just some one-dimensional array structure. We can create row vectors and column vectors though, in the sense of 1 x n and n x 1 matrices, by explicitly adding a second axis. Any of these would create a column vector:
```

```

Now back to the initial `matmul` example. 

## Back to the puzzles

The [documentation for matmul says](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/linalg/matmul),

> The inputs must, following any transpositions, be tensors of rank >= 2 where the inner 2 dimensions specify valid matrix multiplication dimensions, and any further outer dimensions specify matching batch size.

So here (see code just below), the inner two dimensions look good -- `(2, 3)` and `(3, 2)` -- while the one (one and only, in this case) batch dimension shows mismatching values `2` and `1`, respectively.
A case for broadcasting thus: Both "batches" of `a` get matrix-multiplied with `b`.

```{r}
a <- tf$constant(keras::array_reshape(1:12, dim = c(2, 2, 3)))
a 
# tf.Tensor(
# [[[ 1.  2.  3.]
#   [ 4.  5.  6.]]
# 
#  [[ 7.  8.  9.]
#   [10. 11. 12.]]], shape=(2, 2, 3), dtype=float64)

b <- tf$constant(keras::array_reshape(101:106, dim = c(1, 3, 2)))
b  
# tf.Tensor(
# [[[101. 102.]
#   [103. 104.]
#   [105. 106.]]], shape=(1, 3, 2), dtype=float64)

c <- tf$matmul(a, b)
c
# tf.Tensor(
# [[[ 622.  628.]
#   [1549. 1564.]]
# 
#  [[2476. 2500.]
#   [3403. 3436.]]], shape=(2, 2, 2), dtype=float64) 
```

> Let's quickly check this really is what happens, by multiplying both batches separately:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's quickly check if this really is what happens, by multiplying both batches separately:
```

```{r}

tf$matmul(a[1, , ], b)
# tf.Tensor(
# [[[ 622.  628.]
#   [1549. 1564.]]], shape=(1, 2, 2), dtype=float64)

tf$matmul(a[2, , ], b)
# tf.Tensor(
# [[[2476. 2500.]
#   [3403. 3436.]]], shape=(1, 2, 2), dtype=float64)
```

Is it too weird to be wondering if broadcasting would also happen for matrix dimensions? E.g., could we try `matmul`ing tensors of shapes `(2, 4, 1)` and `(2, 3, 1)`, where the `4 x 1` matrix would be broadcast to `4 x 3`? -- A quick test shows that no.

> To see how really, when dealing with TensorFlow operations, it pays off overcoming one's inner ADHD and actually consult the documentation, let's try another one.

Reviewer: I try to avoid using diagnoses as slang, maybe inner desire? (Don't feel bad—lots of people do it; I'm probably an outlier in avoiding it).

Author: Hm... I think you mean it's cheap, kinda?
Of course when you say "lots of people do it" I have no choice than change (ehem)
:-)))

Author: -> "initial reluctance"

> In the documentation for [matvec](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/linalg/matvec), we are told 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the documentation for [matvec](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/linalg/matvec), we are told: 
```

> Multiplies matrix a by vector b, producing a * b. 
The matrix a must, following any transpositions, be a tensor of rank >= 2, with shape(a)[-1] == shape(b)[-1], and shape(a)[:-2] able to broadcast with shape(b)[:-1].

> In our understanding, given input tensors of shapes `(2, 2, 3)` and `(2, 3)`, `matvec` should result perform two matrix-vector multiplications: once for each batch, as indexed by each input's leftmost dimension. Let's check this -- so far, there is no broadcasting involved:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our understanding, given input tensors of shapes `(2, 2, 3)` and `(2, 3)`, `matvec` should perform two matrix-vector multiplications: once for each batch, as indexed by each input's leftmost dimension. Let's check this -- so far, there is no broadcasting involved:
```

# tf.Tensor([2522. 3467.], shape=(2,), dtype=float64)
```

The same. Now, will we see broadcasting if `b` has just a single batch?

```{r}
b = tf$constant(keras::array_reshape(101:103, dim = c(1, 3)))
b
# tf.Tensor([[101. 102. 103.]], shape=(1, 3), dtype=float64)

c <- tf$linalg$matvec(a, b)
c
# tf.Tensor(
# [[ 614. 1532.]
#  [2450. 3368.]], shape=(2, 2), dtype=float64)
```

Multiplying every batch of `a` with `b`, for comparison:

```{r}
tf$linalg$matvec(a[1,  , ], b)
# tf.Tensor([ 614. 1532.], shape=(2,), dtype=float64)

tf$linalg$matvec(a[2,  , ], b)
# tf.Tensor([[2450. 3368.]], shape=(1, 2), dtype=float64)
```

It worked!

Now, on to the other motivating example, using _tfprobability_.

### Broadcasting everywhere 

Here again is the setup:

```{r}
library(tfprobability)
d <- tfd_normal(loc = c(0, 1), scale = matrix(1.5:4.5, ncol = 2, byrow = TRUE))
d
# tfp.distributions.Normal("Normal", batch_shape=[2, 2], event_shape=[], dtype=float64)
```

What is going on? Let's inspect _location_ and _scale_ separately:

```{r}
d$loc
# tf.Tensor([0. 1.], shape=(2,), dtype=float64)

d$scale
# tf.Tensor(
# [[1.5 2.5]
#  [3.5 4.5]], shape=(2, 2), dtype=float64)
```

> Just focusing on these tensors and their shapes, and having been told that there's broadcasting going on, we can reason like this: Aligning both shapes on the right and extending `loc`'s shape by `1` (on the left), we have `(1, 2)` which may be broadcast with `(2,2)` - in matrix-speak, `loc` is treated as a row and duplicated.

Reviewer: This is really nicely done!

Author: :-)

Meaning: We have two distributions with mean $0$ (one of scale $1.5$, the other of scale $3.5$), and also two with mean $1$ (corresponding scales being $2.5$ and $4.5$).

Here's a more direct way to see this:

```{r}
d$mean()
# tf.Tensor(
# [[0. 1.]
#  [0. 1.]], shape=(2, 2), dtype=float64)

d$stddev()
# tf.Tensor(
# [[1.5 2.5]
#  [3.5 4.5]], shape=(2, 2), dtype=float64)
```

Puzzle solved!

> Summing up, broadcasting is simple "in theory" (its rules are), but may need some practicing to get it right. Especially, that is, in conjunction with the fact that functions / operators do have their own views on which parts of its inputs should broadcast, and which shouldn't. Really there is no way around looking up the actual behaviors in the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summing up, broadcasting is simple "in theory" (its rules are), but may need some practicing to get it right. Especially in conjunction with the fact that functions / operators do have their own views on which parts of its inputs should broadcast, and which shouldn't. Really, there is no way around looking up the actual behaviors in the documentation.
```
